Armour: LeBron James' homecoming bigger than basketball
Nancy Armour, USA TODAY Sports 7:32 p.m. EDT October 30, 2014

Being the savior of a sports franchise is daunting enough. Being the savior of an entire region - the area where you grew up, no less - well, that's a burden that would buckle the knees of pretty much any athlete.

Any athlete, that is, except LeBron James.

The gigantic new banner outside the arena, the chills-inducing commercial Nike rolled out, the celebrities and fans who flocked to Cleveland on Thursday as if it was Game 7 of the NBA finals - this is exactly what James envisioned when he decided to return.


"The roads, the buildings, the people," James told USA TODAY Sports' Jeff Zillgitt on the eve of his return. "They helped raised me."

Every athlete has a story of a community that helped him or her along the way, and every city has a favored athlete it considers one of its own. For James and northeast Ohio, it's one in the same, the two as tightly intertwined as family.

The people of Akron and Cleveland have been in the bleachers since James was not much older than his own sons, watching with pride as he grew and developed the skills that have made him one of the greatest players of all time. In return, they gave shelter and support to the boy with the young, single mother, making sure he never went astray and, as the spotlight grew, protecting him from those who didn't have his best interests at heart.

USA Today Sports visits Lebron James high school St. Vincent-St. Mary to discuss the joy of having their hometown hero back

"This city saved me from making the wrong turn," James said. "It gave me sports and it gave me mentors."

James has been generous in his gratitude. He made a promise when he left high school to never forget where he came from and, even when he was in Miami, he has made sure those were not empty words.

His LeBron James Family Foundation runs hands-on programs to keep at-risk Akron kids stay in school. James is closely involved, leaving occasional voice messages for the kids and writing friendly notes each week that include a subtle life lesson. They're signed, "Your friend, Mr. LeBron."

He paid to renovate the gym at his old high school, St. Vincent-St. Mary, and has donated new uniforms for the sports teams. He has helped restore the clubhouses at Boys & Girls Clubs, including ones in Akron and Cleveland.

But for all the quiet good he's done, James' decision to return to Cleveland has sent the loudest message.

As one of the world's best athletes and most famous people, he and his family could live anywhere. Yet he chose northeast Ohio. That seal of approval is a psychological boost as well as an economic one for a region still struggling to get back on its feet, and James is well aware of it.

"My relationship with Northeast Ohio is bigger than basketball," James wrote in his Sports Illustrated essay this summer announcing he was going back home after four years in Miami. "I didn't realize that four years ago. I do now."

Oh, sure. He desperately wants to end Cleveland's 50-year drought in major sports championships. But in all the interviews and the commercials he's done, the message is that, together, he and his city can do something extraordinary.

Because this isn't just about basketball. It's personal.

It's home.