Starbucks Shares Tumble On Sales Lag
Lauren Gensler
Forbes Staff


Starbucks shares were down 5% after it reported that while revenues were up 10% in its fourth quarter, it narrowly missed Wall Street expectations.

It also gave lower-than-expected forecasts for its current quarter.

The Seattle-based coffee giant reported 5% sales growth across stores, booking $4.2 billion in revenues and marking the 19th consecutive quarter that it has seen sales growth of 5% or more. Yet the Street had slightly higher expectations of $4.23 billion, which investors seemed to focus on, sending shares tumbling in after-hours trading.

Earnings were $0.74 per share for the quarter, excluding items, in line with its own expectations of $0.73 to $0.75 per share and analyst expectations of $0.74. For the current quarter, ending in December, the company is forecasting per-share earnings of $0.79 to $0.81 a share. Analysts had expected $0.83 per share.

The company also reported full-year earnings Thursday, with net revenues up 11% to $16.4 billion. "Starbucks performance in fiscal 2014 was extraordinary by any metric or comparison," said CEO Howard Schultz. "But we cannot be content with the status quo, as consumers continue to demand more and more in terms of convenience and excellence."

To that end, it continues to experiment with new offerings, recently buying up tea chain Teavana, announcing plans to open 100 specialty Starbucks stores selling only its small-batch "reserve" coffees and completing its nationwide rollout of La Boulange bakery food.

It even started selling the beloved Pumpkin Spice Latte early this year.

Starbucks is still growing its footprint, too. It opened 500 net new stores across the globe in the fourth quarter, bringing its total to 21,366 stores in 65 countries. It is midway through its acquisition of Starbucks Japan, which represents its second-largest market in retail store sales and is expected to boost revenue once fully owned.

The company also announced a 23% dividend increase Thursday, bringing it to $0.32 per share. Starbucks stock is down more than 2% year-to-date.